There are too many variables in `pelicanconf.py` involved in this problem, it's hard say who plays a part who doesn't. I'm gonna give a working setting and traps you might get caught up with.

+ This Disqus comment feature can not be previewed locally, I will explain it later.
+ Set SITEURL variable. Might not be relevant and not useful in some themes. Just in case. Typically it's a 1st domain name such as "http://hello.me"
+ Better comment SITEURL out when locally previewing. It sets some links to the remote site when you do local previewing.
+ Set DISQUS\_SITENAME = <YOUR_DOMAIN\>. It can be any string you like.
+ Follow [disqus_static plugin installation](https://github.com/getpelican/pelican-plugins/tree/master/disqus_static), the html text under **usage** is not relevant in most of the themes. Of course I can't test them all. When register the application at Disqus, there are many blanks you need to fill in. Fill in <YOUR_DOMAIN\> when possible, in case some blank is used to match DISQUS\_SITENAME.
+ There is another registration process you need to go through. I don't remember where is the entrance, but the first step is for you to choose whether you want to comment as a user or install Disqus comment feature to your site. After the registration `<YOUR_DOMAIN.disqus.com/admin/settings>` should be accessible. Click `site -> advanced` on the left. Add SITEURL to `Trusted Domains`. `localhost` or `127.0.0.1` can't be added. That's why this feature can't be previewed locally.
+ If you set DISQUS_SITENAME and it matches the corresponding setting on Disqus.com, for some themes like `pelican-clean-blog` `comment` hyperlinks should be visible under each article on index page.
+ When the comment section is not loaded on an article page, for some themes it's hard to tell if your plugin is not loaded correctly or it's communication failure between your site and Disqus. Those themes fail silently. Some other themes will show error message "We were unable to load Disqus" and give a [trouble shooting link](https://help.disqus.com/customer/portal/articles/472007-i-m-receiving-the-message-%22we-were-unable-to-load-disqus-%22). For themes that fail silently you can comment out `PLUGIN_PATHS` and `PLUGINS` to see if things are different in any ways. Themes like **Flex** are integrated with Disqus plugin so that's trouble saving.